Roscoff, France is a charming old port with excellent weather, food and science. From 10th to 14th October, CNRS biological station hosted the Jacques Monod conference in evolutionary genomics and systems biology. The intimate conference was a huge success, bringing together leading scientists in evolutionary genomics, population genetics and systems biology. The hundred-odd participants were spoiled with latest advances in understanding the evolutionary processes that govern the evolution of sex, adaptation and biological complexity.

Thinking back on the week, a few thoughts have sticked particularly well in mind. Many groups demonstrated that from bacteria to yeast and fruit flies, adaptation does't seem to be "mutation limited". Many of these observations indicate that of the three textbook forces that govern evolution - mutation, natural selection and drift - the two latter are the most important when thinking of how populations evolve and adapt over time. In other words, many cases suggest that populations do not need to "wait for adaptive mutations" in order to adapt. Instead, the raw material for evolutionary change seems to exist as standing variation, or emerges fast, so that adaptive processes are principally governed by the balance between selection and drift. These are remarkable findings and sure to raise discussion.

Another remarkable trend that emerged clear and concise from the presentations last week were studies of the evolution of biological complexity that bridge systems biology with evolutionary processes. The mix of talks from systems biology and evolution was clever from the part of the organisers, and at least for me helped to really understand that some excellent systems biology science has clear (and testable) evolutionary consequences. As an example, studies of compensatory evolution by Csaba Pal from Hungary imply clear evolutionary hypotheses: epistasis in fitness gains should be widespread and speciation could be completely due to compensatory evolution that remediates the fitness effects of deleterious mutations (without a hint of directional selection!). Cool hypotheses which are worth testing.

All in all I had a great week in Roscoff, with plenty of cutting edge science, lots of new contacts and excellent scientific discussions. Without forgetting delicious French cuisine, of course.

